[PEP - Wheel Variant] Staging before push to upstream (#6)
wheelnext/peps: peps/pep-0815.rst

PEP: 815
Title: Wheel Variants - extending platform awareness
Author: Jonathan DEKHTIAR <jonathan@dekhtiar.com>,
        Michał Górny <mgorny@quansight.com>,
        Konstantin Schütze <konstin@mailbox.org>,
        Ralf Gommers <ralf.gommers@gmail.com>,
        Andrey Talman <atalman@meta.com>,

>         Charlie Marsh <crmarsh416@gmail.com>,

Reviewer: Nit: Do you mind using `charlie.r.marsh@gmail.com` (if not `charlie@astral.sh`)?

Reviewer 2: I'm fine with either, I think I've copied that from your commit messages. Just tell me which one you prefer (or "suggest" a change).

        Michael Sarahan <msarahan@gmail.com>,
        Eli Uriegas <eliuriegas@meta.com>,
        Barry Warsaw <barry@python.org>,
        Donald Stufft <donald@stufft.io>
Discussions-To: Pending
Status: Draft
Type: Standards Track
Topic: Packaging
Created: 03-Dec-2025
Post-History:

Abstract
========

The Python wheel packaging format uses
:doc:`packaging:specifications/platform-compatibility-tags` to specify

> wheel’s supported environments based on Python version, ABI, and

Reviewer: ```suggestion
a given wheel’s supported environments based on Python version, ABI, and
```

platform (operating system, architecture, core system libraries).  These

> tags are not able to express features of modern hardware. This is

Reviewer: ```suggestion
tags are unable to express features of modern hardware. This is
```

particularly challenging for the scientific computing, artificial

> intelligence (AI), machine learning (ML), and high-performance computing

Reviewer: ```suggestion
intelligence (AI), machine learning (ML), and high-performance computing (HPC)
```

communities, where packages are often built with specific hardware
accelerations (e.g., NVIDIA CUDA, AMD ROCm), specialized CPU
instructions (e.g., AVX512_BF16), or other system dependencies.

This PEP proposes “Wheel Variants,” an extension to the
:doc:`packaging:specifications/binary-distribution-format`.  This
extension introduces a mechanism for package maintainers to declare
multiple build variants for the same package version, while allowing
installers to automatically select the most appropriate variant based on
system hardware and software capabilities and characteristics. More
specifically, it proposes:

- An evolution of the wheel format called **Wheel Variant** that allows
  wheels to be distinguished by hardware or software attributes.

> - A **variant provider plugin** interface allowing to dynamically detect

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- A **variant provider plugin** interface that allows installers to dynamically detect
```

  platform attributes and select the most suitable wheel.

The goal is to simplify the user experience to a familiar

> ``pip install <package>``, while ensuring optimal performance and

Reviewer: ```suggestion
``[uv] pip install <package>``, while ensuring optimal performance and
```

compatibility. This approach allows seamless package resolution without
requiring intrusive changes to installers, ensures backward
compatibility, and minimizes the burden on package maintainers.

Definitions
===========

The key words “MUST”, “MUST NOT”, “REQUIRED”, “SHALL”, “SHALL NOT”,
“SHOULD”, “SHOULD NOT”, “RECOMMENDED”, “MAY”, and “OPTIONAL” in this
document are to be interpreted as described in :rfc:`2119`.

Motivation
==========

The Python packaging ecosystem has evolved to support increasingly
diverse computing environments. The current software ecosystem often

> relies on platform specific features to pick which binaries are

Reviewer: ```suggestion
relies on platform-specific features to determine which binaries are
```

> compatible with a particular computer. Unfortunately the current wheel

Reviewer: ```suggestion
compatible with a particular machine. Unfortunately the current wheel
```

> format cannot adequately express the features of modern hardware. This

Reviewer: ```suggestion
format cannot adequately express the diversity of features of present in modern hardware. This
```

limitation forces package authors into suboptimal distribution
strategies and creates friction for users attempting to install
performance-critical packages.

> 

Reviewer: I think I'd add a paragraph here with a concrete example, i.e., bringing up the fact that packages have to be built for specific CUDA or ROCm versions which cannot be included in the wheel tag. As such, you find yourself needing to distribute many builds with identical versions and wheel tags, targeting very different hardware configurations.

Reviewer 2: Yeah, maybe, but we probably need to rewrite the next paragraph then as well.

Existing approaches to handling Python packages with more complex
platform requirements are suboptimal (explored below in greater
details). Some methods include maintaining separate package indexes for
different hardware configurations, bundling all potential variants into
a single “mega-wheel” / “monolithic wheel” or using separate package

> names (``mypackage-gpu``, ``mypackage-cpu``). Each of these approaches

Reviewer: ```suggestion
names (``mypackage-gpu``, ``mypackage-cpu``, etc.). Each of these approaches
```

has significant drawbacks, such as excessive binary size, dependency

> confusion, and inefficient dependency resolution, complex documentation,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
confusion, inefficient dependency resolution, complex documentation,
```

    microarchitectures <https://tgamblin.github.io/pubs/archspec-canopie-hpc-2020.pdf>`__

This PEP proposes a systematic and scalable approach to selecting
optimized wheels based on platform characteristics, which will help
Python’s usage expand across diverse computing environments, from cloud
computing to embedded systems and AI accelerators.

User stories
------------

- A user wants to install a version of NumPy that is specialized for
  their CPU architecture.

- A user wants to install a version of PyTorch that is specialized for
  their GPU architecture.

- A user wants to install a version of mpi4py that has certain features
  enabled (e.g. specific MPI implementations for their hardware).

- A library maintainer wants to build their library for wasm32-wasi with
  and without pthreads support.

- A library maintainer wants to build their library for an Emscripten
  platform for Pyodide with extensions for graphics compiled in.

- A library maintainer wants to provide packages of their game library
  using different graphics backends.

- SciPy wants to provide packages built against different BLAS
  libraries, like OpenBLAS and Accelerate on macOS. This is something

>   they indirectly do today

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  they indirectly do today.
```

Reviewer: (Can you expand on the last point? What do you mean by "indirectly"?)

Reviewer 2: @DEKHTIARJonathan, any chance you wrote that? Or have a clue what this is about?

Reviewer 3: See https://github.com/wheelnext/pep_xxx_wheel_variants/issues/54#issuecomment-3014031815. I don't think "they indirectly do today" is helpful indeed. More like "SciPy already ships wheels linked against different BLAS libraries on macOS, however they are not selectable by the user but keyed on different OS versions."

The limitations of platform compatibility tags
----------------------------------------------

The current wheel format encodes compatibility through three platform
tags:

1. **Python tag:** `The Python tag indicates the implementation and
   version required by a
   distribution <https://packaging.python.org/en/latest/specifications/platform-compatibility-tags/#python-tag>`__
   (e.g., ``cp313``)
2. **ABI tag:** `The ABI tag indicates which Python ABI is required by
   any included extension
   modules <https://packaging.python.org/en/latest/specifications/platform-compatibility-tags/#abi-tag>`__
   (e.g., ``cp313``, ``none``)
3. **Platform tag**: `Operating system and architecture - In its simplest
   form:
   sysconfig.get_platform() <https://packaging.python.org/en/latest/specifications/platform-compatibility-tags/#platform-tag>`__
   (e.g., ``linux_x86_64``)

While these tags effectively handle traditional compatibility
dimensions, they cannot express modern requirements:

> **GPU Accelerated Frameworks:** A wheel filename like

Reviewer: These are good examples.

similar hurdles. The core issue is that wheel tags, while successful,
are not extensible enough to handle the combinatorial complexity of
build options.

Current workarounds and their limitations
-----------------------------------------

Package maintainers have developed various strategies to work around
aforementioned limitations. However, each approach has significant
drawbacks.

These workarounds place a significant burden on both end-users and
package maintainers. Users must understand their hardware and software
environment in detail to select the correct installation command.
Maintainers must manage complex build matrices and provide extensive
documentation on how to install their packages correctly.

The Wheel Variants proposal aims to solve this problem at a fundamental
level within the packaging ecosystem, providing a standardized,
automated, and user-friendly solution.

“Separate package indexes” as variants
''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''

Projects like `PyTorch <https://pytorch.org/get-started/locally/>`__,
`RAPIDS <https://docs.rapids.ai/install/#selector>`__ and other packages
currently distribute packages that approximate “variants” through

> separate package indexes with custom URLs.

Reviewer: There are lots of other examples of this, if helpful. vLLM does it, PyG does it (`pip install pyg-lib -f https://data.pyg.org/whl/torch-${TORCH}+${CUDA}.html`), etc.

.. code:: bash

    pip install torch --index-url="https://download.pytorch.org/whl/cu129"

**This approach requires:**

- Manual selection of artifacts based on hardware and software factors
- Complex installation instructions
- Separate infrastructure maintenance
- Potential security issues when combining multiple indexes
- Managing and potentially hosting all project dependencies when using a
  single index which can significantly increase storage and CDN cost
- Separate index for every combination of compatible features (e.g. GPU
  variants with different levels of CPU optimizations)

**Induced Security Risk:** This approach has unfortunately led to supply

> chain attacks - More details on `PyTorch

Reviewer: ```suggestion
chain attacks - more details on `PyTorch
```

Blog <https://pytorch.org/blog/compromised-nightly-dependency/>`__. It’s

> a non-trivial problem to address which has forced the PyTorch to create

Reviewer: ```suggestion
a non-trivial problem to address which has forced the PyTorch team to create
```

> a complete mirror of all their dependencies. Which is one of the core

Reviewer: ```suggestion
a complete mirror of all their dependencies, and is one of the core
```

motivations behind :pep:`766`.

The complexity of configuration often leads to projects providing ad-hoc
installation instructions rather than covering permanent settings. This
can lead to users being unable to cleanly upgrade the packages, or the

> upgraded packages being reverted to the default variant on upgrades.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
upgraded packages being reverted to the default variant on subsequent upgrades.
```

> “Package name” as variants

Reviewer: ```suggestion
“Package names” as variants
```

Reviewer: Is it worth mentioning how this case does or doesn't accommodate cases like: I want to publish a package `foo` that supports using either `xgboost` or `xgboost-cpu`? Would I have to publish `foo` and `foo-cpu`, with a combination for every combination of dependencies?

Reviewer 2: https://github.com/wheelnext/peps/pull/7

''''''''''''''''''''''''''

Some packages use different names for variants (e.g., ```xgboost`` -
NVIDIA CUDA accelerated,
`xgboost-cpu <https://xgboost.readthedocs.io/en/stable/install.html>`__).
However, this creates dependency management challenges when multiple
packages require the same underlying library with different acceleration
support.

Commonly, these packages install overlapping files. Since Python
packaging does not support expressing that two packages are mutually
exclusive, installers can install both of them to the same environment,
with the package installed second overwriting files from the one
installed first. This could lead to unpredictable behavior, including
the possibility of incidentally switching between variants depending on
upgrade ordering.

> Additional limitation of this approach is that publishing a new release

Reviewer: ```suggestion
An additional limitation of this approach is that publishing a new release
```

and keep their wheel build infrastructure and documentation in sync with
those new package names.

.. code:: text

    cupy-cuda100 cupy-cuda101 cupy-cuda102 cupy-cuda110 cupy-cuda111 cupy-cuda112 cupy-cuda113 cupy-cuda114 cupy-cuda115
    cupy-cuda116 cupy-cuda117 cupy-cuda118 cupy-cuda119 cupy-cuda11x cupy-cuda120 cupy-cuda121 cupy-cuda122 cupy-cuda123
    cupy-cuda124 cupy-cuda125 cupy-cuda126 cupy-cuda127 cupy-cuda128 cupy-cuda129 cupy-cuda12x cupy-cuda13x cupy-cuda70
    cupy-cuda75 cupy-cuda80 cupy-cuda90 cupy-cuda91 cupy-cuda92 cupy-rocm-4-0 cupy-rocm-4-1 cupy-rocm-4-2 cupy-rocm-4-3
    cupy-rocm-4-4 cupy-rocm-4-5 cupy-rocm-5-0 cupy-rocm-5-1 cupy-rocm-5-2 cupy-rocm-5-3 cupy-rocm-5-4 cupy-rocm-5-5
    cupy-rocm-5-6 cupy-rocm-5-7 cupy-rocm-5-8 cupy-rocm-5-9 cupy-rocm-6-0 cupy-rocm-6-1 cupy-rocm-6-2 cupy-rocm-6-3

“Extra-Dependency” as variants
''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''

`JAX <https://docs.jax.dev/en/latest/installation.html>`__ uses a
plugin-based approach. The central ``jax`` package provides a number of
extras that can be used to install additional plugins,
e.g. ``jax[cuda12]`` or ``jax[tpu]``. This is far from ideal as

> ``pip install jax`` (with no extra) would provide a broken install for

Reviewer: ```suggestion
``pip install jax`` (with no extra) leads to a broken installation for
```

JAX includes 12 extra selectors to cover all use cases - many of which
overlap and could be misleading to users if they don’t read in detail
the documentation.

It should be noted that most of these “extras” are technically mutually
exclusive, though it is currently impossible to correctly express this
incompatibility within the package metadata.

.. code:: email

    Provides-Extra: minimum-jaxlib
    Provides-Extra: cpu
    Provides-Extra: ci
    Provides-Extra: tpu
    Provides-Extra: cuda
    Provides-Extra: cuda12
    Provides-Extra: cuda13
    Provides-Extra: cuda12-local
    Provides-Extra: cuda13-local
    Provides-Extra: rocm
    Provides-Extra: k8s
    Provides-Extra: xprof

Bundled universal packages - monolithic builds
''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''

Including all possible variants in a single wheel is another option, but
this leads to excessively large artifacts, wasting bandwidth and slower
installation times for users who only need one specific variant. In some
cases, such artifacts cannot be hosted on PyPI because they exceed its
size limits.

Wheel variant selection via source distribution
'''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''

> `Flash-attention <https://github.com/Dao-AILab/flash-attention>`__ does

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`FlashAttention<https://github.com/Dao-AILab/flash-attention>`__ does
```

not publish wheels on PyPI at all, but instead publishes a customized
source distribution that performs platform detection, downloads the
appropriate wheel from upstream server, and then provides it to the
installer. Such an approach can provide a good end-user experience by
selecting the most optimal variant automatically. However, it prevents
``--only-binary`` installs from working and requires downloading source
distribution and running its build phase. In this case, it also requires
running with ``--no-build-isolation``. It requires hosting wheels
separately, and does not provide for uniform experience across the
ecosystem.

**Induced Security Risk:** similarly to regular source builds, this

> model requires running arbitrary code at install time.

Reviewer: Isn't it also a security risk in that you lose some provenance because the `setup.py` is just downloading a wheel from the Internet?

Reviewer 2: I think my logic was "arbitrary code disqualifies it, so no need to bother more", but I'll add one more sentence.

Reviewer 2: https://github.com/wheelnext/peps/pull/7

Ecosystem fragmentation
'''''''''''''''''''''''

The lack of standardized variant support has led to ecosystem
fragmentation:

**Inconsistent User Experience**: Each package uses different
installation methods, creating confusion and reducing discoverability.

**Development Tool Complications**: Installation tools, IDEs, and CI/CD

> systems struggle to handle non-standard installation requirements.

Reviewer: Is this part true? I don't know that it feels justified by the above.

Reviewer 2: I guess you should know best — after all, doesn't `uv` special-case PyTorch already?

Reviewer 3: I think the quote I added about Spyder speaks to this. That said, I think that this is probably the least important compared to the burden on end users and package authors.

**Documentation Burden**: Maintainers must create and maintain complex
installation guides and users must read them. If they don’t know or
don’t take the time to read it - almost certainly their install will be

> dysfunctional.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
don’t take the time to read it, their install will likely be dysfunctional.
```

Impact on scientific computing and AI/ML workflows
--------------------------------------------------

> **TODO: Let’s insert as many quotes as possible from the community**

Reviewer: Yeah, I think this should be a strong moment in the PEP. We should have quotes from developers of the above projects (e.g., vLLM).

Reviewer 3: I have 3 in a branch, will open a PR before the meeting. It was just hard to fit in without rewriting half the Motivation section - need to check if it's easier now.

Reviewer 3: Done in https://github.com/wheelnext/wheelnext/pull/110 separate, then can be synced to this PR.

computing clusters with different architectures (CPU, Hardware
accelerators, ASICS, etc.). The current system requires
environment-specific installation procedures, making reproducible
deployment difficult. This situation also contributes to making
“scientific papers” difficult to reproduce.

Artificial intelligence, machine learning, and deep learning
''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''

The recent advances in modern AI workflows increasingly rely on GPU
acceleration, but the current packaging system makes deployment complex
and adds a significant burden on open source developers of the entire
tool stack (from build backends to installers, not forgetting the
package maintainers).

Motivation summary
------------------

As highlighted in the previous section, the current Python packaging
system cannot adequately serve the needs of modern heterogeneous
computing environments. These aforementioned limitations force package
authors into complex workarounds that create friction for users,
increase maintenance burden, and fragment the ecosystem.

**Wheel Variants provide a standardized solution that:**

> - Enables automatic hardware-appropriate package selection

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Enables automatic hardware-appropriate package selection.
```

- Maintains full backward compatibility with existing tools (by
  guaranteeing to not break non-variant aware installers, tools, and

>   indexes)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Maintains full backward compatibility with existing tools (i.e., non-variant aware installers, tools, and
  indexes remain unaffected).
```

- Simplifies package maintenance by offering a unified and flexible
  solution to the challenge of managing multiple platform-specific
  package builds and distributions.
- Provides a seamless and predictable experience for users, that

>   requires little to no user inputs.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Provides a seamless and predictable experience for users, with little-to-no user input required.
```

> - Supports the full spectrum of modern computing hardware

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Supports the full spectrum of modern computing hardware.
```

supported.

If a GPU runtime is available and supported, the installer automatically
chooses the wheel for the newest runtime supported. Otherwise, it falls
back to the CPU-only variant. In the corner case when both CUDA and ROCm
are available and supported, PyTorch package maintainers indicate which
one takes preference by default.

Optimized CPU variants
''''''''''''''''''''''

Wheel variants can be used to provide variants requiring specific CPU
extensions, beyond what platform tags currently provide. They can be
particularly helpful when runtime dispatching is impractical, when the
package relies on prebuilt components that use instructions above the
baseline or when availability of instruction sets implies library ABI
changes.

For example, an x86-64 CPU plugin can detect the capabilities for the
installed CPU, mapping them onto the appropriate x86-64 architecture
level and a set of extended instruction sets. Variant wheels indicate
which level and/or instruction sets are required, filter out variants
that do not meet the requirements and select the best optimized variant.
A non-variant wheel can be used to represent the architecture baseline,

> if supported.

Reviewer: This happened to me recently with vLLM, if you want a concrete example. They support an AVX-512 build, but I had to forgo AVX-512 support to make a minimally-compatible wheel.

compatibility with existing package managers and tools. The design was
made with the intent to protect non-variant-aware tools from failure
when a new type of wheel appears that they don’t know how to manage.

Wheel variant glossary
----------------------

This section focuses specifically on the vocabulary used by the proposed
“Wheel Variant” standard:

Variant Wheels
    Wheels that share the same distribution name, version, build number,
    and platform compatibility tags, but are distinctly identified by an
    arbitrary set of variant properties.

Variant Namespace
    An identifier used to group related features provided by a single
    provider (e.g., ``nvidia``, ``x86_64``, ``arm``, etc.).

Variant Feature
    A specific characteristic (key) within a namespace (e.g.,
    ``version``, ``avx512_bf16``, etc.) that can have one or more
    values.

Variant Property
    A 3-tuple (``namespace :: feature-name :: feature-value``)
    describing a single specific feature and its value. If a feature has
    multiple values, each is represented by a separate property.

Variant Label
    A string added to the wheel filename to uniquely identify variants.

>     A string up to 16 characters.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    A string (up to 16 characters) added to the wheel filename to uniquely identify variants.
```

`A JSON Schema is included in the Appendix of this PEP.  <pep-0815/variant_schema.json>`__

Provider information
''''''''''''''''''''

``providers`` is a dictionary, the keys are namespaces, the values are
dictionaries with provider information. It specifies how to install and
use variant providers. A provider information dictionary must be
declared in ``pyproject.toml`` for every variant namespace supported by
the package. It must be copied to ``variant.json`` as-is, including data
for providers that are not used in the particular wheel.

A provider information dictionary may contain the following keys:

- ``enable-if: str``: An environment marker defining when the plugin
  should be used. If the environment marker does not match the running
  environment, the provider will be disabled and the variants using its
  properties will be deemed incompatible. If not provided, the plugin
  will be used in all environments.

- ``install-time: bool``: Whether this is an install-time provider.
  Defaults to ``true``. ``false`` means that it is an AoT provider
  instead.

- ``optional: bool``: Whether the provider is optional, as a boolean

>   value. Defaults to ``false``. If it is true, the provider is

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  value. Defaults to ``false``. If it is ``true``, the provider is
```

>   considered optional and should not be used unless the user opts in to

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  considered optional and should not be used unless the user opts-in to
```

Reviewer 2: I don't think this is correct. The verb is "opt in", "opt-in" is the noun.

  it, effectively rendering the variants using its properties

>   incompatible. If it is false or missing, the provider is considered

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  incompatible. If it is ``false`` or missing, the provider is considered
```

  obligatory.

- ``plugin-api: str``: The API endpoint for the plugin. If it is
  specified, it must be an object reference as explained in the `API
  endpoint`_ section. If it is missing, the package name from the first
  dependency specifier in ``requires`` is used, after replacing all
  ``-`` characters with ``_`` in the normalized package name.

- ``requires: list[str]``: A list of zero or more package dependency
  specifiers, that are used to install the provider plugin. If the
  dependency specifiers include environment markers, these are evaluated
  against the environment where the plugin is being installed and the
  requirements for which the markers evaluate to false are filtered out.
  In that case, at least one dependency must remain present in every
  possible environment. Additionally, if ``plugin-api`` is not
  specified, the first dependency present after filtering must always
  evaluate to the same API endpoint.

All the fields are optional, except that:

1. If ``install-time`` is true, the dictionary describes an install-time
   provider and the ``requires`` key must be present and specify at

>    least one dependency.

Reviewer: Because that "one dependency" is, presumedly, the Python package containing the provider itself?

Reviewer 2: Yes. It's basically "empty `requires` make no sense because then you don't have anything to call".

PEP: 815

> Title: Wheel Variants - extending platform awareness

Reviewer 3: As just discussed, "awareness" might be a little off and it's about more than platform only.

Maybe a more accurate one would be something like: _Wheel Variants - hardware and build config specific wheels_?

Author: Jonathan DEKHTIAR <jonathan@dekhtiar.com>,
        Michał Górny <mgorny@quansight.com>,
        Konstantin Schütze <konstin@mailbox.org>,
        Ralf Gommers <ralf.gommers@gmail.com>,
        Andrey Talman <atalman@meta.com>,
        Charlie Marsh <crmarsh416@gmail.com>,
        Michael Sarahan <msarahan@gmail.com>,
        Eli Uriegas <eliuriegas@meta.com>,
        Barry Warsaw <barry@python.org>,
        Donald Stufft <donald@stufft.io>
Discussions-To: Pending
Status: Draft
Type: Standards Track
Topic: Packaging
Created: 03-Dec-2025
Post-History:

Abstract
========

The Python wheel packaging format uses

> :doc:`packaging:specifications/platform-compatibility-tags` to specify

Reviewer 4: The other PEPs don't use the specification prefix

platform (operating system, architecture, core system libraries).  These
tags are unable to express features of modern hardware. This is
particularly challenging for the scientific computing, artificial
intelligence (AI), machine learning (ML), and high-performance computing (HPC)
communities, where packages are often built with specific hardware
accelerations (e.g., NVIDIA CUDA, AMD ROCm), specialized CPU
instructions (e.g., AVX512_BF16), or other system dependencies.

This PEP proposes “Wheel Variants,” an extension to the
:doc:`packaging:specifications/binary-distribution-format`.  This
extension introduces a mechanism for package maintainers to declare
multiple build variants for the same package version, while allowing
installers to automatically select the most appropriate variant based on
system hardware and software capabilities and characteristics. More
specifically, it proposes:

- An evolution of the wheel format called **Wheel Variant** that allows
  wheels to be distinguished by hardware or software attributes.

- A **variant provider plugin** interface that allows installers to dynamically detect
  platform attributes and select the most suitable wheel.

> The goal is to simplify the user experience to a familiar

Reviewer 4: The abstract is already long, I'd cut the paragraph below

Reviewer 2: As in cut if after the command, or remove the paragraph entirely?

Reviewer 4: The whole paragraph, but maybe the "The goal is to simplify the user experience to a familiar `[uv] pip install <package>`" is helpful to keep, given it's the same as in the pytorch quote.

Reviewer 2: Actually, I'll try to rewrite the abstract. I see some unnecessary detail here that should really be moved into other sections, as well as missing bits that we could shortly mention.

format cannot adequately express the diversity of features of present in modern hardware. This
limitation forces package authors into suboptimal distribution
strategies and creates friction for users attempting to install
performance-critical packages.

Existing approaches to handling Python packages with more complex
platform requirements are suboptimal (explored below in greater
details). Some methods include maintaining separate package indexes for
different hardware configurations, bundling all potential variants into
a single “mega-wheel” / “monolithic wheel” or using separate package
names (``mypackage-gpu``, ``mypackage-cpu``, etc.). Each of these approaches
has significant drawbacks, such as excessive binary size, dependency
confusion, inefficient dependency resolution, complex documentation,
etc.

According to the `2024 Python Developers
Survey <https://lp.jetbrains.com/python-developers-survey-2024/#purposes-for-using-python>`__,
a significant portion of respondents over the last years have been
successively using Python for scientific computing purposes, covering
such areas as Data analysis (steadily over 40% respondents), Machine

> learning (grown to 40% in 2024), Data engineering (around 30%), and

Reviewer 4: nit: Drop the "many more", three examples is good

more. Many of these use cases are directly impacted by suboptimal
packaging.

This issue is often crossing the boundaries of scientific computing - as
highlighted in the following issue: `manylinux_2_34 x86-64 builds
produce binaries that are not compatible with all x86-64
CPUs <https://github.com/pypa/manylinux/issues/1725>`__, where
``manylinux_2_34_x86_64`` now implicitly requires ``x86_64-v2`` with no
support for other x86 version. This lack of support results in
complexity in managing platform-specific dependencies and compatibility.

> That complexity affects the installation process for users and increases

Reviewer 4: The problem here is really that it's impossible to express any or different x86_64 versions, so you have to pick an oldest version you support and ship only that.

Reviewer 2: I find it hard to understand your point. FWIU the issue there is that packages implicitly require v2 and we can't express that. Being able to ship multiple wheels is tangential to that.

Reviewer 4: For most projects, runtime dispatch is out of scope, but they can set `-march=x86-64-v2` (or equivalent). Some projects would like to ship a `-march=x86-64-v4` wheel for the free perf improvement from auto-vectorization, but can't cause they can't tag it. There's not really complexity in managing that as projects currently just can't use that perf feature they'd like to use.

Reviewer 2: Do you think there's a point in mentioning the manylinux issue at all?

Reviewer 4: Not really, I don't find it representative of the main problem, especially given that the two reported cases were one user that solved it be updating the VM software and another case was a CPU from 2010 (it looks like the last non-SSE2 CPUs were shipped in 2013).

the maintenance burden for package authors. The ``x86_64`` compiler
flags further emphasizes the urgent need for a more expressive and
efficient solution in the Python packaging ecosystem.

As illustrated by
`archspec <https://github.com/archspec/archspec>`__’s authors and
maintainers, the ability to optimize a package for a specific
architecture can lead to significant performance improvement (and often

> also reduce power requirements, etc.).

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
As illustrated by
`archspec <https://github.com/archspec/archspec>`__, the ability to
optimize a package for a specific architecture can lead to a
significant performance improvement.
```

.. figure:: pep-0815/avx512_gromacs_benchmark.png
    :alt: A bar graph comparing GROMACS performance (in ns/day) with
          various targets. The first two bars are labeled "yum (2018.8)"
          and "generic (SSE2)", reach about 1.0 ns/day and are both
          marked as "SSE2". The next bar is labeled "ivybridge" ("AVX")
          and reaches almost 1.5 ns/day.  Two following bars are labeled
          "haswell" and "broadwell" (both "AVX2") and exceed 1.5 ns/day
          slightly.  The last two bars are labeled "skylake_avx512" and
          "cascadelake" (both "AVX512") and reach almost 2.0 ns/day.

>     GROMACS AVX512 Benchmark

Reviewer 4: What's the GROMACS benchmark, and what do the numbers refer to? The figure description should contain a concise description of what is being measured, just enough for a Python programmer who hasn't heard GROMACS before to understand the impact.

Reviewer 2: @DEKHTIARJonathan

..

    “Compiling `GROMACS <https://www.gromacs.org/>`__ for architectures
    that can exploit the AVX-512 instructions supported by the Intel
    Cascade Lake microarchitecture gives an additional 18% performance
    improvement relative to using AVX2 instructions, with a speedup of
    about 70% compared to a generic GROMACS installation with only SSE2.”

    — `archspec: A library for detecting, labeling, and reasoning about
    microarchitectures <https://tgamblin.github.io/pubs/archspec-canopie-hpc-2020.pdf>`__

> This PEP proposes a systematic and scalable approach to selecting

Reviewer 4: I'd reduce those sentences (e.g. omit this paragraph), I think the use cases and quotes speak for themselves and make a stronger point.

optimized wheels based on platform characteristics, which will help
Python’s usage expand across diverse computing environments, from cloud
computing to embedded systems and AI accelerators.

> User stories

Reviewer 4: These seem somewhat redundant with the way more concrete examples in the next paragraph, should we merge them?

Reviewer 2: Yeah, let's remove this. No point in listing abstract use cases without examples when we have specific examples.

------------

- A user wants to install a version of NumPy that is specialized for
  their CPU architecture.

- A user wants to install a version of PyTorch that is specialized for
  their GPU architecture.

- A user wants to install a version of mpi4py that has certain features
  enabled (e.g. specific MPI implementations for their hardware).

- A library maintainer wants to build their library for wasm32-wasi with
  and without pthreads support.

- A library maintainer wants to build their library for an Emscripten
  platform for Pyodide with extensions for graphics compiled in.

- A library maintainer wants to provide packages of their game library

>   using different graphics backends.

Reviewer 4: We don't have any references for graphics or gaming, so I'd omit that use case

- SciPy wants to provide packages built against different BLAS
  libraries, like OpenBLAS and Accelerate on macOS. This is something
  they indirectly do today.

The limitations of platform compatibility tags
----------------------------------------------

The current wheel format encodes compatibility through three platform
tags:

1. **Python tag:** `The Python tag indicates the implementation and
   version required by a
   distribution <https://packaging.python.org/en/latest/specifications/platform-compatibility-tags/#python-tag>`__
   (e.g., ``cp313``)
2. **ABI tag:** `The ABI tag indicates which Python ABI is required by
   any included extension
   modules <https://packaging.python.org/en/latest/specifications/platform-compatibility-tags/#abi-tag>`__

>    (e.g., ``cp313``, ``none``)

Reviewer 4: ```suggesion
   (e.g., ``cp313``, ``abi3``, ``none``)
```

Ideally more packages use the stable over the unstable API

3. **Platform tag**: `Operating system and architecture - In its simplest
   form:
   sysconfig.get_platform() <https://packaging.python.org/en/latest/specifications/platform-compatibility-tags/#platform-tag>`__
   (e.g., ``linux_x86_64``)

While these tags effectively handle traditional compatibility
dimensions, they cannot express modern requirements:

**GPU Accelerated Frameworks:** A wheel filename like
``torch-2.9.0-cp313-cp313-manylinux_2_28_x86_64.whl`` provides no
indication whether it contains NVIDIA CUDA support, AMD ROCm support,
Intel XPU support, or is CPU-only. Users cannot determine compatibility
with their GPU hardware or drivers.

**CPU Instruction Sets:** A wheel filename like
``numpy-2.3.2-cp313-cp313-manylinux_2_27_x86_64.manylinux_2_28_x86_64.whl``
provides no indication whether it contains CPUs optimized instructions
ranging from basic x86-64 to modern processors with AVX512, SHA-NI, and
other specialized instructions. Packages cannot indicate whether they

> require or benefit from specific CPU features. In turns having to rely

Reviewer 4: Should this be `turn` (without s)?

Reviewer 2: Yes. That said, I'll rewrite this, since it's technically incorrect, given runtime dispatching possibility.

on the lowest common denominator forces to leave performance on the
table.

**Runtime Dependencies:** Scientific computing packages often depend on
specific BLAS implementations (OpenBLAS vs Intel MKL), MPI providers
(OpenMPI vs MPICH), or other system libraries that affect both

> functionality and performance. The current Wheel format is not able to

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
functionality and performance. The current wheel format is not able to
```

encode that dependency.

This lack of flexibility has led many projects to find sub-optimal - yet
necessary - workarounds. Such as this manual selector provided by the
PyTorch team. This complexity represents a fundamental scalability issue
with the current tag system.

.. figure:: pep-0815/pytorch_variant_selector.png
    :alt: A grid-based selector for PyTorch versions. Individual rows
          provide the choice of PyTorch Build (stable or nightly),
          operating system (Linux, Mac, Windows), package (Pip,
          LibTorch, Source), language (Python, C++ / Java), and Compute
          Platform (CUDA 12.6, CUDA 12.8, CUDA 13.0, ROCM 6.4, CPU).
          Below these rows, the pip install command for the selected
          variant is provided, utilizing the --index-url parameter.

    PyTorch Wheel Selector

**Source:** https://pytorch.org/get-started/locally/ (screen capture
date: 2025/08/22)

This problem is not unique to PyTorch. Projects like JAX, NumPy, SciPy,
Scikit-Learn and many others in the scientific Python ecosystem face

> similar hurdles. The core issue is that wheel tags, while successful,

Reviewer 4: Maybe:

> Wheel variants can capture GPU compatibility in wheel filenames and select the correct wheel at install time.

Reviewer 2: Not really "filenames", but otherwise yes.

are not extensible enough to handle the combinatorial complexity of
build options.

Current workarounds and their limitations
-----------------------------------------

> Package maintainers have developed various strategies to work around

Reviewer 4: I'd drop these three paragraphs, this information should emerge from the description of the workarounds, and should otherwise already be understood by the PEP reader.

**Development Tool Complications**: Installation tools, IDEs, and CI/CD
systems struggle to handle non-standard installation requirements.

**Documentation Burden**: Maintainers must create and maintain complex
installation guides and users must read them. If they don’t know or
don’t take the time to read it, their install will likely be dysfunctional.

Impact on scientific computing and AI/ML workflows
--------------------------------------------------

**TODO: Let’s insert as many quotes as possible from the community**

The packaging limitations particularly affect scientific computing and
AI/ML applications where performance optimization is critical.

    The current wheel format’s lack of hardware awareness creates a
    suboptimal experience for hardware-dependent packages. While plugins
    help with smaller and well scoped packages, users must currently
    manually identify the correct variant (e.g., ``jax[cuda13]``) to
    avoid generic defaults or incompatible combinations. We need a system
    where ``pip install jax`` automatically selects packages matching the
    user’s hardware, unless explicitly overridden.

>     WheelNext is a clear step in the right direction in this regard.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
    Wheel variants are a clear step in the right direction in this regard.
```

''''''''''''''''''''

Packages such as `vLLM <https://docs.vllm.ai/en/latest/index.html>`__
need to be pinned to the PyTorch version they were built against to
preserve Application Binary Interface (ABI) compatibility. This often
results in unnecessarily strict pins in package versions, making it
impossible to find a satisfactory resolution for an environment
involving multiple packages requiring different versions of PyTorch, or
resorting to source builds. Variant wheels can be used to publish
variants of vLLM built against different PyTorch version, therefore
enabling upstream to easily provide support for multiple versions
simultaneously.

The optional ``abi_dependency`` extension can be used to build multiple
``vllm`` variants that are pinned to different PyTorch versions, e.g.:

- ``vllm-0.11.0-...-torch29.wheel`` with
  ``abi_dependency :: torch :: 2.9``
- ``vllm-0.11.0-...-torch28.wheel`` with
  ``abi_dependency :: torch :: 2.8``
- ``vllm-0.11.0-...-torch27.wheel`` with
  ``abi_dependency :: torch :: 2.7``

Specification
=============

This PEP proposes a set of backward-compatible extensions to the
:ref:`packaging:binary-distribution-format` specification, and the

> packaging ecosystem version while maintaining complete backward

Reviewer 6: "the packaging ecosystem version" is a bit unclear here, I'm not sure what is meant by it.

Reviewer 2: @DEKHTIARJonathan, that's probably you?

    A 3-tuple (``namespace :: feature-name :: feature-value``)
    describing a single specific feature and its value. If a feature has
    multiple values, each is represented by a separate property.

Variant Label
    A string (up to 16 characters) added to the wheel filename to uniquely identify variants.

Null Variant
    A special variant with zero variant properties and the reserved
    label ``null``. Always considered supported but has the lowest
    priority among wheel variants, while being preferably chosen over
    non-variant wheels.

Variant Provider
    A provider of supported and valid variant properties for a specific
    namespace, usually in the form of a Python package that implements
    system detection.

Install-time Provider
    A provider implemented as a plugin that can be queried during wheel
    installation.

Ahead-of-Time Provider
    A provider that features a static list of supported properties which
    is then embedded in the wheel metadata.  Such a list can either be
    embedded in ``pyproject.toml`` or provided by a plugin queried at
    build time.

Overview
--------

Wheel variants introduce a more fine-grained specification of built

> wheel characteristics beyond what wheel tags provide. Individual wheels

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
wheel characteristics beyond what existing wheel tags provide. Individual wheels
```

are characterized by sets of variant properties that are organized into
a hierarchical structure of namespaces, features and feature values.
When evaluating wheels to install, the installer must determine whether
variant properties are compatible with the system in addition to
determining the tag compatibility. To choose the most suitable wheel to
install, the installer must order wheels according to the priorities of

> their variant properties first, and their tags second.

Reviewer 6: I think to tie in the last sentence better it'd be good to discuss that variant properties have a priority earlier in the paragraph.

Reviewer 2: https://github.com/wheelnext/peps/pull/11

Every variant namespace is governed by a variant provider. There are two
kinds of variant providers: install-time providers and ahead-of-time

> (AoT) providers. Install-time providers require plugins that are queried

Reviewer 6: This has likely been bikeshed already while I was out, so please ignore me if it has. I think "install-time" and "ahead of time" are rather lengthy descriptors, and "install-time" may be a bit of a misnomer. If a user is e.g. resolving a lock file, there may not be any installation.

Perhaps static/dynamic would be clearer?

Reviewer 2: That's a good question. We had static/dynamic for different kinds of plugin API earlier, but that's no longer the case, so it may work.

Reviewer 2: As discussed on Slack, we'll stay with the current terminology for the time being to avoid updating the metadata format now. We may revisit this after the DPO thread.

while installing wheels to determine the set of supported properties and
their preference order. For AoT providers, this data is static and
embedded in the wheel; it can be either provided directly by the

> developer or queried at wheel build time from an AoT plugin. Both kinds

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
embedded in the wheel; it can be either provided directly by the
wheel maintainer or queried at wheel build time from an AoT plugin. Both kinds
```

of plugins are usually implemented as third-party Python packages

> providing the API specified in this document.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
of plugins are usually implemented as Python packages external
to the resolver which implement the APIs specified in this document.
```

This is really a nit, but "third-party" is unclear as to what the packages are third-party to.

Package managers must not install or run any untrusted package for

> variant resolution without the explicit user opt-in. Provider packages

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
variant resolution without explicit user opt-in. Provider packages
```

should take measures to guard against supply chain attacks, for example

> by vendoring all dependencies. Pinning dependencies is discouraged to

Reviewer 6: Should we perhaps mention package signing/attestations here?

Reviewer 2: Not sure how that helps (though I suppose that's related to us inadequately describing the problem). I think the main problem is the potential of arbitrary packages being installed and executed at install time. Attestations don't really change that — packages still specify arbitrary plugins that could compromise your system, whether they are signed or not. On top of that, the security benefit from attestations is disputable at best.

Reviewer 6: Well, users that want install-time plugins but care about not allowing arbitrary plugins could use attestations to verify that they are only allowing plugins from trusted sources.

Reviewer 2: Ah, so presumably rather than opting in to specific plugin by name, they'd opt in to it by GitHub repository URL, therefore removing the narrow part of attack scope where attacker takes control of the PyPI project but not the GitHub repository.

Reviewer 6: I think attestations will become much more useful as they expand beyond the current GitHub/GitLab/etc. sources. We've also already seen a number of phishing campaigns against PyPI so I think compromising a PyPI account but not a GitHub account/other attestation source is entirely reasonable.

comply with PEP 517 build process, as provider plugins may be needed at
build time and dependencies pinned to different versions could prevent
different plugins from being installed simultaneously in the same
environment.

It is recommended that the most commonly used plugins are either
vendored, reimplemented, or locked to specific wheels after verifying
their trustworthiness, to enable the ability to securely install variant

> wheels out-of-the-box. To reduce the maintenance costs, repositories of

Reviewer 6: I think the opening of this paragraph is a bit confusing to me because it is unclear who is should vendor/reimplement/lock plugins. Maintainers? Resolvers?

I presume it is resolvers, but it'd be good to clarify that.

Reviewer 2: The original answer would be "installers", but now you got me thinking whether that's an appropriate term. That said, I don't think "resolvers" is entirely clear either. I suppose we're basically talking about any tools that may need to query the supported variant properties of user's system.

such vetted plugins could be maintained collaboratively and shared
between different package managers.

For plugins not in such a pre-approved list, a trust-on-first-use
mechanism for every version is recommended. In interactive sessions, the
package manager can explicitly ask the user for approval. In
non-interactive sessions, the approval can be given using command-line
interface options. It is important that the user is informed of the risk
before giving such an approval.

For a consistent experience between tools, variant wheels should be
supported by default. Tools may provide an opt-out to only use
non-variant wheels. For scenarios requiring more control, providers can
be marked as optional and must be explicitly enabled by the user.

> Overview of changes

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
Summary of changes
```

Since the last section is titled "Overview" perhaps this section should be a summary of changes?

   a. that every distinct variant has a unique filename
   b. that variant wheels are not accidentally installed by
      non-variant-aware tools.

2. **Variant Metadata Format**: Standardized metadata describing variant
   properties and provider requirements.

   a. Metadata specification at “project level” inside
      ``pyproject.toml``
   b. Metadata specification of “built packages” inside two JSON files:

      i. ``*.dist-info/variant.json``: Individual wheel variant
         metadata.
      ii. ``*-variants.json``: Variant metadata file aggregated on the
          package index.

3. **Provider Plugin System**: Plugin interface to allow detection of
   system capabilities and validate variant compatibility.

4. **Environment Markers**: New environment markers to declare
   dependencies that are applicable to a subset of variants only.

Extended wheel filename
-----------------------

This PEP changes the wheel filename template originally defined by
:pep:`427` to:

.. code::

    {distribution}-{version}(-{build tag})?-{python tag}-{abi tag}-{platform tag}(-{variant label})?.whl

Wheels using extensions introduced by this PEP must feature the variant

> label component. It must adhere to the following rules:

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
label component. The label must adhere to the following rules:
```

- Lower case only (to prevent issues with case-sensitive
  vs. case-insensitive filesystems)
- Between 1-16 characters

> - Using only ``0-9``, ``a-z``, ``.`` or ``_`` ASCII characters

Reviewer 6: I believe it would be better to use `\w` and `\d` to describe the characters allowed, for internationalization. (Same for the regex below)

Reviewer 2: We deliberately didn't want to open that can of worms. With internationalization, case sensitivity becomes much more a technical issue (think of the Turkish i/I).

Reviewer 6: I still strongly believe that we should support non-ASCII characters. I suppose case sensitivity is theoretically an issue for wheel project names as well, but practically speaking I don't think case sensitivity has really been an issue. If we care deeply about that, we could allow non-ASCII characters and specify an additional requirement that all labels must not conflict on case-insensitive filesystems.

Reviewer 2: Ah, sorry, you were talking of variant labels and I was thinking of variant properties.

To be honest, I didn't even realize Unicode is permitted in wheel filenames. That said, given that [project names are limited to ASCII](https://packaging.python.org/en/latest/specifications/name-normalization/#name-format) and other filename components are unlikely to contain non-ASCII characters (even if the spec permits that), I'm not convinced there's much of a point in allowing more here.

Reviewer 2: Oh, and just to be clear I'm not opposed to Unicode per se (though e.g. with package names it would be dangerous). My point is rather that I believe the reasons for restrictions we have now (e.g. lowercase) are good, and allowing Unicode would be inconsistent with simultaneously having such a rigorous restrictions.

This is equivalent to the following regular expression:
``^[0-9a-z._]{1,16}$``.

Every label must uniquely correspond to a specific set of variant
properties, same for all wheels using the same label within a single

> package version. Variant labels should be specified at wheel build time,

Reviewer 6: > same for all wheels using the same label within a single package version

Shouldn't the label be the same globally? It would be very confusing if different packages have different labels for the same sets of variant properties.

Reviewer 2: It's impossible to guarantee globally matching labels.

Reviewer 6: I agree, but I think it would still be useful to indicate that labels should be globally the same, at least within an ecosystem. Or at least within a project!

I also think this is something indexes could check.

Reviewer 2: Not necessarily. A project that has a single CUDA variant would be clearer with a `-cuda` label, whereas one with variants matching multiple CUDA versions needs e.g. `-cu120`, `-cu125`. By requiring consistent labels, you're basically expecting people to guess up front what labels people may need in the future.

as human-readable strings. The label ``null`` is reserved for the null
variant and must use an empty set of variant properties.

Installers that do not implement this specification must ignore wheels
with variant label when installing from an index, and fall back to a

> wheel without such label if it is available.

Reviewer 6: Maybe covered later, but the behavior for what to do when there *isn't* a non-variant wheel should be either specified or explicitly left unspecified.

Reviewer 2: It's not but that's a good idea indeed. In fact, we probably have two cases to cover:

1. There is no non-variant wheel for the newest version, so the installer falls back to an earlier version — we should probably warn about it.
2. There is no non-variant wheel at all — not sure if we need to say this out loud, but the installer should provide a clear error message.

A semi-related question is how the installer should behave if none of the variants are supported.

Reviewer 2: https://github.com/wheelnext/peps/pull/11

Examples:

- Non-variant wheel:
  ``numpy-2.3.2-cp313-cp313t-musllinux_1_2_x86_64.whl``
- Wheel with variant label:
  ``numpy-2.3.2-cp313-cp313t-musllinux_1_2_x86_64-x86_64_v3.whl``

Variant properties
------------------

Every variant wheel must be described by zero or more variant
properties. A variant wheel with exactly zero properties represents the
null variant. The properties are specified when the variant wheel is
being built, using a mechanism defined by the project’s build backend.

Each variant property is described by a 3-tuple that is serialized into
the following format:

::

    {namespace} :: {feature_name} :: {feature_value}

The namespace must consist only of ``0-9``, ``a-z`` and ``_`` ASCII
characters (``^[a-z0-9_]+$``). It must correspond to a single variant

> provider.

Reviewer 6: Same as above when discussing the label, we should use `\w` and `\d` to describe valid entries. (same for the following two paragraphs)

The feature name must consist only of ``0-9``, ``a-z`` and ``_`` ASCII
characters (``^[a-z0-9_]+$``). It must correspond to a valid feature
name defined by the respective variant provider in the namespace.

> The feature value must consist only of ``0-9``, ``a-z``, ``_`` and ``.``

Reviewer 6: I noticed that `.` can only be used in the feature value. Is there a reason to exclude it from the names and namespaces? If so it would be good to clarify why above these paragraphs.

Reviewer 2: It's in the rationale section.

https://github.com/wheelnext/peps/pull/6/files#diff-a93e8d47553464b0c59bf04ab34d9c3fad604f10e78674f37048771c2a78e9e4R701-R704

ASCII Characters (``^[a-z0-9_.]+$``). It must correspond to a valid
value defined by the respective variant provider for the feature.

If a feature is marked as “multi-value” by the provider, a single
variant wheel may define multiple properties sharing the same namespace

> and feature name. Otherwise, only a single value can correspond to a

Reviewer 6: I think multi-value might be something the plugin specifies? But I don't see mention of how a feature gets marked multi-value by the provider.

Reviewer 2: It's in the plugin API.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
If a feature is marked as “multi-value” by the provider plugin, a single
variant wheel may define multiple properties sharing the same namespace
and feature name. Otherwise, only a single value can correspond to a
```

Thanks for the  clarification!

and properties of a package and its wheels. The format is used in three
locations, with slight variations:

1. in the source tree, inside the ``pyproject.toml`` file
2. in the built wheel, as a ``*.dist-info/variant.json`` file
3. on the package index, as a ``{name}-{version}-variants.json`` file.

All three variants metadata files share a common JSON-compatible
structure:

.. code:: text

    (root)
    |
    +- providers
    |  +- {namespace}
    |     +- enable-if     : str | None = None
    |     +- install-time  : bool       = True
    |     +- optional      : bool       = False
    |     +- plugin-api    : str | None = None
    |     +- requires      : list[str]  = []
    |
    +- default-priorities
    |  +- namespace        : list[str]
    |  +- feature
    |     +- {namespace}   : list[str]  = []
    |  +- property
    |     +- {namespace}
    |        +- {feature}  : list[str]  = []
    |
    +- static-properties
    |  +- {namespace}
    |     +- {feature}     : list[str]  = []
    |
    +- variants
      +- {variant_label}
         +- {namespace}
            +- {feature}  : list[str]  = []

The top-level object is a dictionary rooted at a specific point in the

> containing file. Its invidual keys are sub-dictionaries that are

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
containing file. Its individual keys are sub-dictionaries that are
```

described in the subsequent sections, along with the requirements for
their presence. The tools must ignore unknown keys in the dictionaries
to permit future backwards compatible updates to the PEP. However, users
should not introduce custom keys to avoid potential future conflicts.

> .. TODO: how to actually include it in generated files?

Reviewer 6: I think it is better to keep the JSON Schema in the appendix, it would break the flow to have a large JSON document inlined.

Reviewer 2: In the comment, I meant that the `.json` file doesn't get copied to `build/`.

Reviewer 6: Aha! I would add an RST appendix, link to that at the end, and include the JSON document from the appendix.

Reviewer 2: That still doesn't seem to actually include the raw `.json` file, which we want for people to use in the URL.

  considered optional and should not be used unless the user opts in to
  it, effectively rendering the variants using its properties
  incompatible. If it is ``false`` or missing, the provider is considered
  obligatory.

- ``plugin-api: str``: The API endpoint for the plugin. If it is
  specified, it must be an object reference as explained in the `API
  endpoint`_ section. If it is missing, the package name from the first
  dependency specifier in ``requires`` is used, after replacing all
  ``-`` characters with ``_`` in the normalized package name.

- ``requires: list[str]``: A list of zero or more package dependency
  specifiers, that are used to install the provider plugin. If the
  dependency specifiers include environment markers, these are evaluated
  against the environment where the plugin is being installed and the
  requirements for which the markers evaluate to false are filtered out.
  In that case, at least one dependency must remain present in every
  possible environment. Additionally, if ``plugin-api`` is not
  specified, the first dependency present after filtering must always
  evaluate to the same API endpoint.

> All the fields are optional, except that:

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
All the fields are optional, with the following exceptions:
```

         "x86_64": {
            "enable-if": "platform_machine == 'x86_64' or platform_machine == 'AMD64'",
            "plugin-api": "provider_variant_x86_64.plugin:X8664Plugin",
            "requires": ["provider-variant-x86-64 >=0.0.1"]
         }
      },
      "static-properties": {
         "blas_lapack": {
            "provider": ["accelerate", "openblas", "mkl"]
         },
      },
      "variants": {
         // always a single entry, expressing the variant properties of the wheel
         "x8664v3_openblas": {
            "blas_lapack": {
               "provider": ["openblas"]
            },
            "x86_64": {
               "level": ["v3"]
            }
         }
      }
    }

``{name}-{version}-variants.json``: the index level variant metadata file
'''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''

For every package version that includes at least one variant wheel,
there must exist a corresponding ``{name}-{version}-variants.json``
file, hosted and served by the package index. The ``{name}`` and
``{version}`` placeholders correspond to the package name and version,
normalized according to the same rules as wheel files, as found in the

> :ref:`packaging:wheel-file-name-spec` of Binary Distribution Format

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
:ref:`packaging:wheel-file-name-spec` of the Binary Distribution Format
```

specification.  The link to this file must be present on all index pages

> where the variant wheels are linked.

Reviewer 6: This definitely needs to be clarified. We should specify a `data-dist-info-variants` marker attribute to be added to the `a` tag linking to the variants file for the HTML encoding containing it's hash. We should introduce a new top-level `[dist-info]-variants` key in the JSON simple API project detail dictionary.

> where the variant wheels are linked.

Reviewer 4: We treat the variants json file like an archive file (not like a `.metadata` file), it's a regular top level enty, including having a hash. I'll file a PR.

installer. Such an approach can provide a good end-user experience by
selecting the most optimal variant automatically. However, it prevents
``--only-binary`` installs from working and requires downloading source
distribution and running its build phase. In this case, it also requires
running with ``--no-build-isolation``. It requires hosting wheels
separately, and does not provide for uniform experience across the
ecosystem.

**Induced Security Risk:** similarly to regular source builds, this
model requires running arbitrary code at install time. The wheels
are downloaded entirely outside package manager's control, extending
the attack surface to two wheel fetching implementations and preventing
proper provenance tracking.

Ecosystem fragmentation
'''''''''''''''''''''''

The lack of standardized variant support has led to ecosystem
fragmentation:

**Inconsistent User Experience**: Each package uses different
installation methods, creating confusion and reducing discoverability.

**Development Tool Complications**: Installation tools, IDEs, and CI/CD
systems struggle to handle non-standard installation requirements.

> **Documentation Burden**: Maintainers must create and maintain complex

Reviewer 4: I would replace this with it being error prone. At least I haven't heard complaints about this being too much effort to document, but i've seen many cases in which those custom workarounds broke, from the pytorch index missing hashes over nvidia packages downloading the wrong artifact on the tooling side to so many complaints about installing GPU packages on the user side.

    peers. And third, to allow users to transfer their code to machines
    in HPC clusters or the cloud with no hassle, so they can leverage
    the vast compute resources available there. With the improvements
    proposed by this PEP, we'd be able to make that a reality for all
    PyPI users because installing widely used scientific libraries (like
    PyTorch and CuPy) for the right GPU and instruction set and would be
    straightforward and transparent for tools built on top of uv/pip.

    — Carlos Córdoba, lead developer of the Spyder IDE

Artificial intelligence, machine learning, and deep learning
''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''

The recent advances in modern AI workflows increasingly rely on GPU
acceleration, but the current packaging system makes deployment complex
and adds a significant burden on open source developers of the entire
tool stack (from build backends to installers, not forgetting the
package maintainers).

The lead maintainer of XGBoost enumerates a number of problems XGBoost
has that he expects will be addressed by wheel variants:

    * Large download size, due to the use of "fat binaries" for multiple

>       SMs. Currently, XGBoost builds for 11 different SMs.

Reviewer 4: We haven't introduces SMs at this point

    # plugin-api inferred from requires
    requires = ["blas-lapack-variant-provider"]
    # plugin used only when building package, properties will be inlined
    # into variant.json
    install-time = false

``*.dist-info/variant.json``: the packaged variant metadata file
''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''

The ``variant.json`` file must be present in the ``*.dist-info/``
directory of a built variant wheel. It is serialized into JSON, with the
variant metadata dictionary being the top object. It must include all
the variant metadata present in ``pyproject.toml``, copied as indicated
in the individual key sections. In addition to that, it must contain:

- a ``$schema`` key whose value is the URL corresponding to the schema
  file supplied in the appendix of this PEP. The URL contains the
  version of the format, and a new version must be added to the appendix
  whenever the format changes in the future,

- a ``variants`` object listing exactly one variant - the variant
  provided by the wheel.

The variant.json file corresponding to the wheel built from the example
pyproject.toml file for x86-64-v3 would look like:

.. code:: json5

    {

>       // TODO: replace this with appendix URL for the PEP

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
      // The schema URL will be replaced with the final URL on packaging.python.org
```

preserve the old endpoint in minimal maintenance mode, to ensure that
old wheels can still be installed. The old endpoint can trigger
deprecation warnings in the ``get_all_configs()`` hook that is used when
building packages.

An alternative approach is to use semantic versioning to cut off
breaking changes. However, this relies on package authors reliably using
caps on dependencies, as otherwise old wheels will start using
incompatible plugin versions. This is already a problem with Python
build backends used today.

When vendoring or reimplementing plugins, installers need to follow the
current API. In particular, they should recognize the relevant provider
versions numbers, and possibly fall back to installing the external
plugin when the package in question is incompatible with the installer’s
implementation.

Example use cases
-----------------

PyTorch CPU/GPU variants
''''''''''''''''''''''''

As of October 2025,
`PyTorch <https://pytorch.org/get-started/locally/>`__ publishes builds
a total of seven variants for every release: a CPU-only variant, three
CUDA variants with different minimal CUDA runtime versions and supported

> GPUs, two ROCm variants and a Linux XPU variant.

Reviewer 3: I'm not sure who wrote this, but it doesn't look quite right to me. Right now the install widget has 5 flavors, 3 CUDA, 1 ROCm, 1 CPU. No ROCm 7.x, no XPU.

Also, if there were XPU, it should say "three GPU plugins" below, rather than two. 

I think we want to go with the 5 flavors visible in the widget. @atalman do you agree?

Reviewer 2: @atalman did: https://github.com/wheelnext/wheelnext/commit/0a9689b6106f513edc7e2ae0fb2df2fbe10cd3f3#diff-638d2b17e710403ab501eba18ab53c80a281ad637cb7065cd70623354e770f9aL143-R144

Reviewer 7: Pytorch builds XPU wheels and publishes them at (https://download.pytorch.org/whl/xpu). However, availability of XPU builds is not yet announced on the pytorch getting started page (https://pytorch.org/get-started/locally/), we are in the process to get XPU there. Links to the XPU downloads are published on the XPU specific pytorch page - https://docs.pytorch.org/docs/stable/notes/get_start_xpu.html.

wheels will be incompatible with existing tools. This is a general
problem with the design of environment markers, and not specific to
wheel variants. It is possible to work around this problem by partially
evaluating environment markers at build time, and removing the markers
or dependencies specific to variant wheels from the regular wheel.

Build backends produce non-variant wheels to preserve backwards
compatibility with existing frontends. Variant wheels can only be output
on explicit user request.

By using a separate ``*-variants.json`` file for shared metadata, it is
possible to use variant wheels on an index that does not specifically
support variant metadata. However, the index must permit distributing
wheels that use the extended filename syntax and the JSON file.

Reference implementation
========================

The `variantlib <https://github.com/wheelnext/variantlib>`__ project
contains a reference implementation of all the protocols and algorithms
introduced in this PEP, as well as a command-line tool to convert
wheels, generate the ``*-variants.json`` index and query plugins.

A client for installing variant wheels is implemented in

> `uv <https://github.com/astral-sh/uv>`__.

Reviewer 3: This will need a bit more detail, since the point of this section is to guide the reader to a reference implementation. Maybe link to a gist with the key details (how to install or use the functionality, pointers to the key PRs or parts of the code base)?

Reviewer 4: https://github.com/wheelnext/peps/pull/24 - The PR description contains an overview of the current state.

old wheels can still be installed. The old endpoint can trigger
deprecation warnings in the ``get_all_configs()`` hook that is used when
building packages.

An alternative approach is to use semantic versioning to cut off
breaking changes. However, this relies on package authors reliably using
caps on dependencies, as otherwise old wheels will start using
incompatible plugin versions. This is already a problem with Python
build backends used today.

When vendoring or reimplementing plugins, installers need to follow the
current API. In particular, they should recognize the relevant provider
versions numbers, and possibly fall back to installing the external
plugin when the package in question is incompatible with the installer’s
implementation.

Example use cases
-----------------

PyTorch CPU/GPU variants
''''''''''''''''''''''''

As of October 2025,
`PyTorch <https://pytorch.org/get-started/locally/>`__ publishes builds
a total of seven variants for every release: a CPU-only variant, three
CUDA variants with different minimal CUDA runtime versions and supported
GPUs, two ROCm variants and a Linux XPU variant.

> This setup could be improved using two GPU plugins that query the

Reviewer 7: > Also, if there were XPU, it should say "three GPU plugins" below, rather than two.

To the point from @rgommers above, I think it will be easier to drop specific number of GPU plugins which needs to be implemented as that's implementation details.

```suggestion
This setup could be improved using GPU plugins that query the
```

Reviewer 3: Thanks @dvrogozh. This is being taken along in gh-25.

> PEP: 815

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
PEP: 817
```

Author: I'll merge this once the PR is merged I need to rename a few files ;)
